# IBP_Project

These pipelines use two different batch correcting methods in order to visualize gene expression onto UMAP representations of post mortem human Alzheimers snRNA-seq samples. They were developed for the Integrated Bioinformatics Project by Nikolay Makarenko, Rucsanda Juncu, and Mieke Nicolaï in association with KU Leuven and Dr. Stein Aerts. 

The following is the abstract from the IBP paper accompanying this code: 
"Alzheimer's disease is a complex neurodegenerative disease, involving unique gene expression profiles of different central nervous system (CNS) cell types. Analysis of 48,534 single nucleotide RNA-seq nuclei from post mortem human Alzheimer’s and healthy patients’ brain samples was conducted using different data clustering methods. Comparison of batch correcting methods (scVI and Harmony)(Gayoso et al., 2022)(Korsunsky et al., 2019), as well as dimensionality reduction with Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection (UMAP)(McInnes et al., 2018) and  partition-based graph abstraction (PAGA) paths allowed for profiling of differentially expressed genes among control and diseased nuclei. Gene ontology (GO) analysis of these genes revealed astrocytes having functional enrichment of extracellular and fibrillary proteins TNC and GFAP. Microglia expression of TREM2 was lower than expected, however, GO terms for signal transduction associated with other receptor proteins were shown to be upregulated. Oligodendrocytes had associations with purine binding and DEGs indicating remyelination. Further exploration should be performed into clustering quality and confirming gene signals."
